+++
title = "Clutter: The Influence of SSW in Rest of the Zones"
draft = false
date = "2014-09-16T08:57:52+05:30"

+++

Rarely does anyone talk about this or hardly does one consider this to be a cause for concern. But a space full of clutter is just incapable of inviting peace and prosperity.

Clutter comes in many forms. It can be emotional (I am unable to dispose, my kids' first t-shirts, their baby books, their first toys) or it can be in the form of clothes that I once bought, but no longer fit in! Or, it can be in form of things, that I think I will use some day, but that some day will just not come!

What our parents naturally did every Deepawali, has been termed by the Japanese as the concept of the 5S. Wherever I have seen this concept being followed, happier times have always been around.

The concept of 5S originated in Japanese automotive industry and is considered as one of the fundamental building blocks for an organization. 5S is the name of a workplace organization method that uses a list of five Japanese words:

1. **Seiri**: sort
1. **Seiton**: set in order
1. **Seiso**: shine 
1. **Seiketsu**: standardize
1. **Shitsuke**: sustain

The 1st ‘S’ stands for Seiri (Sort).  
Separate needed and unneeded things and remove the latter.

The 2nd ‘S’ stands for Seiton (Set in order).  
Organize or arrange systematically. Apply ‘PEEP’- a Place for Everything and Everything in its Place - concept.

The 3rd ‘S’ stands for Seiso (Shine).  
Keep your space clean, where cleaning is inspection.

The 4th ‘S’ stands for Seiketsu (Standardise).  
Set standards and rules so that the first 3 ‘S’ are followed and sustained in your space.

The 5th ‘S’ stands for Shitsuke (Sustain).  
Practice the 5S system continuously so that it becomes habitual and ingrained in the culture of the family.

So, with Deepawali round the corner, some de-cluttering will definitely go a long way..... If you don't need something, give it away to someone who needs it. They will thank you for it and you will have one less thing to worry about.

Acharya Seema Karecha.
