+++
title = "The Element of AIR"
draft = false
date = "2016-12-15T09:34:11+05:30"

+++

One of the fundamental challenges faced by people is their inability to grasp the root of problems and address the same meaningfully. This can be in terms of Vastu or any other domain of life.

What does it take to grasp and understand a subject?

This happens simply as we fail to pay ‘Attention’. If we were to pay attention, the nuances and details of the subject would emerge to meet our eyes, which otherwise usually missed.

What is Attention? Attention is a focused state of a calm mind.

When attention is paid to the subject of choice, one attains depth, clarity, and mastery in it. When one pays attention to relationships and family values, it results in lifelong bonds. When this attention is paid into making and finishing of a product, it results into a quality product, which is eventually categorized as "A-Class" or as “Luxury”. When this attention is paid to exercise and diet, it results in a healthier being. And when this attention is paid to one’s work, it results in success.

If attention is so important, why do we often fail to pay attention or why is the quality of our attention so poor most of the times?

Attention is a resultant state which is only possible when the mind is calm and when it is free from distractions.

Calmness is symbolic of the element of Earth. Earth represents steadiness and stability. Movement is the attribute of Air. Distraction can be understood as excess and random movement of thoughts or actions.

To understand this problem in terms of Vastu - whenever there is excess presence of element of Air in a space - whether in the form of extended Air element zones or presence of Air element in other zones or spending a majority of the time in Air element zones, it manifests into distractions and disturbances in different domains of life.

Due to excess Air element, the mind is engaged in trivial or multiple tasks which hinders it from focussing on the relevant. Either it will always be busy on irrelevant things such as social life or social media (Facebook, whatsapp or youtube), or other non-meaningful social activities. This reduces the ability of the mind to pay attention and get to the root of things that matter.

Excess of Air in the space can also disturb the harmony in relationships (the domain of the Earth element). When the AIr based zones are extended, in such cases the family members would be always want to be on the “move” and “happening”. It can be in terms of a new projects or ideas, or leading active social life, which prevents them from getting a feeling of being settled with the family. It may also happen that they would care too much of their social status than giving importance to the core bonding and family values. Not all family challenges come from SouthWest. Excess of Air in a space also plays a significant role in disturbing the family equation.

Gadgets too belong to the element of Air. Communication does not allow the brain wave frequency to lower down and thus maintaining it to the Beta level (12 to 4o Hz). A lower brain wave frequency is required for a sound sleep. This is one of the fundamental reasons that it is advised to keep the gadgets (Air element) away from the bedroom for a good sleep (Earth Element), so that the brain wave frequency is low by the bedtime, resulting into a healthy sleep.

Thus if you are struggling with attention and other challenges related with it, it is important that you balance the element of Air in your surroundings. .

"Beauty lies in Balancing". Understand elements to understand life. For only when you learn the art of balancing, you shall be able to defy gravity one day!

A beautiful example of Balancing : https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DnpcPN0fwhc

Acharya Seema Karecha.
