+++
title = "Pusha: The Strengthener"
draft = false
date = "2016-07-07T09:34:11+05:30"

+++

**Zone**: SSE

The second energy in the southern direction is known as Pusha.

**Sanskrit Meaning**: To cause to thrive.

**Attributes**:

This energy field is associated with nourishing and strengthening. It has the attribute of MatrIguna or the Divine Mother. It is recommended to place to keep ghee, oil, and butter over here to strengthen and nourish the body. This energy field, along with Indra, is evoked to block the path of enemies. It is also evoked in recovering lost money. This energy field takes care of the space (building) and provides it with strength so that it continues to thrive and it's activities do not fall apart. It is associated with Nakshatra Revati.

In mythology, Pushan is considered to be one of the 12 Adityas. In Rig-veda, Pushan is evoked to guard the live-stock and recover the lost live-stock. It's powers are said to protect the travellers from bandits and beasts, and men from being exploited by other men. It is a supporting God, and a good guide.

It is responsible for growth on spiritual, emotional, and mental planes. While the energy field of Anil imparts the fighting spirit to an individual, Pusha imparts a "never say die" attitude to the residents. It helps to re-emerge successfully after every defeat.

Most of you would be familiar with the story of King Lear.

King Bruce was the king of Scotland. In a battle with the enemy, he loses his kingdom. He quits the fort and flees on a horse back. It's night and pitch dark. It's raining heavy. He takes shelter in a cave. As he sits and rests, in a while he sees a spider trying to form a web. The surface of the cave is slippery, and the spider slips. The spider rises and tries to form a web again. It slips again. Despite repeated falls, the spider does not stop the effort. And finally, after several efforts, the spider manages to form a web. By the time the web is formed, it is day break. King Bruce sees light. He realises that if a tiny creature like a spider refuses to give up and finally manages to form it's web, how can he even think of giving up! He is the King! He should not lose heart and should try fighting the enemy one more time. King Bruce gathers his effort and marches towards the enemy, and after a few attempts, finally succeeds. Pusha is that energy field, which, when balanced, gives us the spirit to never give up and keep moving despite the hardships.

This is the energy field that needs attention when the client is concerned about inadequate growth. It is not restricted to just business or income. Inadequacy of growth can be in form of a foetus (where the growth is not adequate in the mother's womb), or in a growing child, where there are challenges in terms of height and weight. This energy field can also be observed when dealing with recovery of money or finances.

**Entrance Effect**: S2: Working in a job, for an MNC.

Whenever there is an entrance placed under this energy-field, it is observed that a person ends up in a job or service. This energy field is responsible for nourishing and strengthening to make an individual self sufficient. When there is a door placed in this energy field, this strength and nourishment weakens, and the power of self-reliability in an individual is weakened and thus, one ends up doing a job for someone else. But, as the attributes of this energy field are of a mother, it does let the individual down completely, and so the person ends up working in a good position.

**Case study**:

One of my memorable study is of a retired brigadier. He was posted in South Africa about 36 years ago. At that time, he had lent a huge amount of money to one of his close friends. With time, situations changed and the brigadier had lost all contact with his friend and all hope of recovering the huge sum of the money lent, was lost.

Just a year ago, his wife had invited me to visit their home for some current challenges that had come up recently in their lives. During the conversation, brigadier mentioned about the money he had loaned years back. I said that as the event that had taken place almost three decades ago, and it would be naive to even think of recovering it today. As I observed the home, I found a blue carpet lying in this zone. I requested for the blue carpet to be removed and replace it with a green one, as the zone was cut in the bar chart. No other remedy was done.

To my amazement, in a month the brigadier received a call from his old friend. She told him that she was towards the end of her life and would not want to die with a burden! He finally could recover his money.

**Practical observations**:

Presence of blue color in this zone causes major imbalances in the growth of residents. In one of the cases, where the pregnant mother was struggling with the growth of her unborn child, removal of aqua blue color from this area, helped bring positive results.

In another case, a mother was concerned about the height and growth of her teenage son. Balancing the zone, showed a positive effect.

**Conclusion**:

Pusha is a motherly energy field. Just like a mother, it nourishes and takes care of its residents. Just as a child cannot thrive without the love, care and attention of a mother, in the same way, residents fail to thrive to their complete potential when this energy field is imbalanced.

Dedicated to all the lovely mothers on the forum, who through this sacred knowledge, strive to make their homes happy, healthy and prosperous.

Acharya Seema Karecha.
