+++
title = "Tantra: An Introduction" 
draft = false
date = "2016-07-17T09:34:11+05:30"

+++

Tantra is an ancient method practiced in India by Yogis since ages where through the involvement of the mind, breath, body and senses, expansion of abilities and self awareness takes place. It opens many new dimensions which one would not be aware, otherwise. 

It's fundamental belief stems from the fact that there is one universal consciousness and we and everything that we see, are a part of it. Everything that we see, is interlinked and interconnected. 

Tantra has Sanskrit roots which means to expand and liberate. Through the expansion of our awareness, it liberates us from our limitations and helps us reach our destination with ease!!!

There are three schools of Tantra. They have two approaches. The dark approach which scares us to death, and we read things that we fail to understand. And the beautiful aspect that is sublime. Swaryog, my passion, belongs to the second one. 

Beauty of this science is that we need to practically experience it. We need someone to guide us. Books merely do not help. 

One who has not touched water cannot experience the joy of swimming. But merely by splashing our hands and feet in water, we do not learn swimming. We need someone, who knows how to swim, to take us in the waters, and teach us the strokes, that help us to learn how to swim. 

Once you receive the experiences, it gets ingrained in your thoughts and nature, and it becomes a part of you. It becomes you. 

Acharya Seema Karecha.
