+++
title = "Mahendra: The Energy Field of the East"
draft = false
date = "2017-06-11T11:41:31+05:30"

+++

The fourth energy field of the eastern direction is MAHENDRA.

**Zone**: East

**Sanskrit meaning of Mahendra**: God of thunder and rain; the commander of four heavens.

**Mythological significance of Mahendra**:

This energy field is one of the most significant Dev in the entire Vastu Purush Mandal, along with Varun and Yam. He is honoured as the King of Gods. His weapon is the Vajra and he rides on the elephant called Airavat.

Mahendra is the lord of the heavens and, as the name suggests, does not settle for anything less than the best. This energy field relates to those who want nothing but the best and all the benefits that come with it. In the Vastu Purush Mandal, it is associated with people and developing associations. When this energy field is balanced in a home, it bestows powerful connections with abundance of money and comfort.

Mythologically, Mahendra is the symbolic representation of the ‘throne’. Mahendra is not an individual. It is the status, given to the one who sits on the throne, for whoever sits on the throne, becomes the king. The value of the throne always remains much higher than the value of the person sitting on it, for the throne is eternal while the kings come and go.

Astrologically, it is associated with the power of the planet Sun, with administration and government authorities.

**Entrance Effects: E4**

When the residents have a door in this energy field, they enjoy a good life with successful associations. This energy field also helps in granting one a high status, respect, and comforts in the society.

**Jayant of the East-North-East and Mahendra of the East**:

While Jayant teaches manipulation at minor levels, Mahendra teaches manipulation on major levels. While providing treatment for clients, if a consultant works on Jayant in a home, then the residents learn how to play smart at small and detailed levels, while if the energy of Mahendra is addressed, then the client shall learn to play bigger games. For a common man, the energy field of Jayant is very important for worldly success than that of Mahendra, while for all politically inclined and ambitious people, for all those who want to gain higher status and luxury in the society, the energy field of Mahendra should be addressed.

**Mahendra in the East and Indra in Southwest**:

During the Vedic periods, only the elemental Gods were revered. Most of the hymns of Rig-veda are dedicated to Indra and Agni. However with changing times of the Puranic periods, the elemental Gods of the Vedic period took a back seat and the importance of the trinity of Brahma, Vishnu and Mahesh came to the forefront. The significance of Indra diminished and his portrayal came across as a headstrong and an arrogant personality.

So while treating this energy field, which attribute of Mahendra should be considered? Should we look at him as the God of thunder and rain that helps to sustain life or should we look at him as the king of Gods, who loves to command and lead? The answer depends on the way a home/space is treated.

If you have looked at the Vastu Purush Mandal in detail, you have noticed that there is another energy field called Indra in the southwest. They both are two sides of the same coin.

So, when the Mahendra of the east is treated or enhanced without balancing the Indra in the southwest, the residents start to portray arrogance and a commanding attitude. They develop an ambition for being on the top without being grounded to the base reality. But if the Indra of the southwest is also balanced along with addressing of Mahendra, then this behaviour is not seen! Then the residents show ambition along with being grounded in reality.

This is because the Indra of the southwest (belonging to the element of Earth) acts as a counter-balance to the power of Mahendra. When this counter-balance is missing, and only the energy of Mahendra is increased in a space, it leads to behaviour disturbances, which are reflected in the attitude of the residents. Thus, whenever there is a complaint about the excess arrogance in family, especially with the main earning member, it can be easily addressed by also balancing the energy field of Indra in the south-west.

**Mahendra in the East, Yama in the South and Varun in the West**:

Mythologically, Varun and Yam are brothers of Mahendra. To get the best result in any space, the energy fields of Varun and Yam should also be addressed while addressing Mahendra.

Do we really need to balance in Mahendra at home, if we do not have any political ambitions or we do not have any high aims?

It is not important that we all want to be Politicians or CEOs or high-ranking dignitaries to balance the energy of Mahendra. An imbalanced Mahendra brings many challenges in day-today life.

In presence of imbalances, the residents, after making a lot of efforts, still may face multiple challenges such as:

1. The family shall not get the name and status that it deserves in the society. The family is not considered A-class in the society.

2. The sons and daughters of marriageable age may not get good proposals. The proposals that they receive may be from very ordinary families.

3. The children from such homes do not make friends with the best in the school and fail to get selected as the class-monitors, head boy or head girl or any important role.

4. In cases of vaastu-consultants and astrologers, they shall fail to get celebrity clients or high-names in their client list.

Hence it does not matter whether you have political or career ambitions, it is important to keep this energy field balanced in the space.

**Remedies and placements**:

In addition to the MV remedies that you are already familiar with, like placing the Ashoka pillar in this field, the placement of God Vishnu in his virat-swaroop and the placement of Airavat, the elephant with seven trunks, have shown beneficial results.

The placement of living and dining in this field have shown positive results while the placement of bed is termed the most beneficial. Placement of the study-table here helps in securing high ranks in the class and placement of the office-table here, helps in getting the best positions at work.

**Placement of Water in East**:

Many a times to enhance the energy of this zone, after balancing, it is advisable to place water, especially when the client wants to start a business of his own. However, when flowing water is placed here, the results are much better in comparison to the placement of stagnant water. The moving waters are light and have flow and motion in them - the attribute of Air, while the stored water in large quantity, becomes the attribute of Earth.

**Energy of Mahendra**:

Mahendra [Maha + Indra] is the king of five senses, and helps the residents revel and enjoy the pleasure derived from these senses. A good life has different meanings to different people. For a common man, a life where all the senses are gratified, is an ultimate life! Working on the energy of Mahendra helps you and your clients enjoy such a life.

> "Within infinite myths lies the eternal truth, Who sees it all?  
Varuna has but a thousand eyes, Indra has a hundred, 
You and I, only two."  
-- Devdutt Pattanaik.

(These observations are solely based on my case-studies and case-studies of many Acharyas. It may or may not apply to your case observations.)

Acharya Seema Karecha.
