+++
title = "Bhrisha: The Creator of Goodwill Zone"
draft = false
date = "2017-11-03T11:41:31+05:30"

+++

The seventh energy field from the eastern direction is Bhrisha.
 
**Zone**: ESE
 
**Significance of Bhrisha**: 

Samudra manthan (समुद्रमन्थन) -- churning of the ocean -- is one of the most famous events in the hindu mythology, and is the attribute of this energy field.

Once the Devtas were defeated by the Demons, to figure a way out, the Devtas sought help from the Lord Vishnu who advised them to handle the matter tactfully. To come to a truce, the Devtas and Demons jointly decided to churn the ocean for the nectar of immortality and share it equally among themselves. The end game plan of the Devtas was to have all the Nectar by themselves and become invincible. Thus began the process of the churning of the ocean with the Devtas on one side and the Demons on the other.

The churning of the ocean first gave rise to the Halahala - the deadly poison, representing the impurities of the ocean. Lord Shiva consumed this poison, due to which his neck turned blue, and he came to be known as the Neelakantha … what happens later, is well-known to all. 
 
The energy field of Bhrisha represents our ability to churn, analyse and come up with meaningful solutions to problems in life. Too much churning is futile as we can never reach a solution, while too little of churning is also of no use as we tend to jump to conclusions without deep thinking. Whenever we find that the analyzing ability of an individual is not effective enough, because of which the individual ends up making wrong decisions in life or remains indecisive, we need to examine this energy field.

Some interesting case observations related to Bhrisha: 
                        
**The Pleasent case of Mr P**:

Mr P was a happy-go-lucky software engineer living with his wife and child. All were happy until the sudden death of his father. His father died in an accident and he was forced to quit his software job in order to takeover his family business of bus-travels in his hometown. His father owned a transport company which ran a fleet of buses to the nearby cities and towns. As soon as Mr P took over the family business, he realized that his father had borrowed a huge amount of about one crore from the local money lenders to buy a fleet of busses and this money was entrusted to his uncle to do the needful purchase. However as soon as his father died, his uncle back stabbed and refused to acknowledge the presence of this huge amount of cash in his custody and thus began a series of challenges in the life of Mr P. After two years of struggle and never ending arguments with the money lenders and fights with his uncle, Mr P started to lose hope and sought help. 

On examining his home, along with a few other imbalances, primarily, I found that the zone of Bhrisha was cut and the walls of the zone were colored blue. The cut in this energy field was reducing his ability to analyse a way out of the situation and figure out a solution. The presence of the blue color in the zone was making things worse. 

**Presence of Blue**:  

ESE is a transitional zone from the element of Air to Fire. Here Air (wood), is being converted into Fire. The presence of blue color in this zone hinders the drying of the wood, thus hindering the conversion of Air to Fire. It is this reason, that on page 49 of the course book, to enhance the zone of ESE, the color green is recommended (and not blue). 

Now going by this theory, one may argue that in the pictures of Samudra-Manthan (which are used in this zone as a remedy), there is always lot of water shown, is permissible, then why is the presence of blue a hinderance? Here we need to be mindful of the fact that the waters shown in the Samudra manthan are the ocean waters - which are not static, and have a lot of movement and turbulence in them. This movement and turbulence, creates friction, which eventually leads to the generation of heat. Thus, it is in this zone, that it is recommended to place mixer-grinders and washing machine. 

Coming back to our case study of Mr P, the cut in the Zone was decreasing his ability to analyse and the blue color was adding to his problems. It impacted his analytical ability to an extent that he could not come-up with solutions that could help him resolve the problem. His every decision was going wrong and making life difficult for him. 

Situation changed only when, eventually, along with remedies in the other zones, the blue wall-color was replaced with green. Eventually, over a period of three months, his decision making power improved and he could help himself overcome the challenges. 

**Other observations**:

Just as blue color decreases the analytical ability of the resident to conclude decisions, in the same way, the presence of red also causes challenges. Red in this zone, creates excess heat, expediting the process and hence preventing the smooth transition of Air to Fire. This leads to the resident taking hasty decisions which in-turn gives losses. 

In certain cases, the presence of sewing machine is seen to give health challenges such as high fluctuations in BP. If you come across such cases, kindly relocate the sewing machine to any of the fire-based zones (SE, SSE, or S). 

In few of the cases, it was observed that the presence of flickering lights, put up during the festivals, in this zone, caused minor fluctuations in the BP. When the lights were removed, there was immediate relief. 

In many cases, health suffers very badly due to presence of kitchen burner in this zone. This can be treated with a yellow stone or the burner can be relocated. However it is best to relocate the kitchen burner out of this zone. 

The presence of metal may also act as anti-element in this zone, reducing the analytical ability of the resident. I had an interesting case observation where the person had to finalize a property from the multiple options available, and even after contemplation of weeks, he could not finalize. In this case, there was a presence of heavy metal in this zone, which was the cause of indecision. 

Along with the imbalance of colors and metal, the presence of sewers  too hamper the analytical ability of the person. This thought raises the question: if a toilet is allowed in this zone, then why not sewers? It is important that we understand the difference between the two. When a toilet is present in the zone, the mess is flushed and cleared immediately, while in case of the sewerage, the mess is present 24x7 in the zone. This constant presence of mess negatively impacts our ability to think and analyse.

**Remedy**: 

The image of Samudra-Manthan is very widely used as remedy in this zone. Once a Senior shared a very beautiful observation with me. He suggested me to use the image of Lord Shiva (Neelkanth) in the NE (Ishan), whenever the image of Samudra Manthan is being used in Bhrisha. He explained me that the process of manthan, along with the good things, also gives rise to poison and presence of the Neelkanth image of Lord Shiva in the NE, helps this poison to be consumed and not spread to the other areas of our life. 

Along with the Kamadhenu cow, the Kalpavruksha and Parijat tree also brings beneficial effects in this zone. 

**Summary**:

In this day and age when everyone seems to be making smart moves to get ahead in the rat race, we need the energy of Bhrisha to impart us the power to think correctly and make meaningful choices and thus make our day-to-day life successful. Bhrisha symbolizes the churning that happens within -- too much of which results into poison, destroying all that is beneficial; and too little of it not helping us reach any meaningful conclusions. There are and shall always be all kind of people that make this world, and in our dealings it is this energy field of Bhrisha that gives us the ability to churn and bring out what is the best suited for us in every situation. 

Remember, even the Devtas needed the Demons to churn out the Amrit!!!

(These observations are solely based on my case-studies and case-studies of many Acharyas. It may or may not apply to your case observations.)

Acharya Seema Karecha.
