+++
title = "Surya: The Energy field of the East"
draft = false
date = "2017-10-12T11:41:31+05:30"

+++

The fifth energy field on the eastern direction is Surya.

**Zone**: East

**Sanskrit meaning**: The sun, the controller, the core, one of the 12 Adityas.

**Mythological Significance of Surya**:

Surya - the Sun God - is considered to be one of the main devtas of Rig-veda. It is the guardian power, the soul, the controller of any system. It is one of the Nine planets (modern science considers Sun a star, not a planet, but astrologically, it is one of the planets) of the solar system, and the most important one. Surya-namaskar is a traditional form of worship to the sun; and the very auspicious Gayatri mantra, is associated with the Sun.

Often shown as riding a chariot of the seven horses, Sun is the guardian power that runs the world. It is said to have 1000 eyes (1000 rays) symbolically meaning that it has a strong power of observation and it can penetrate everywhere. The power of the Sun imparts us with far-sightedness and a capacity to observe, for it is only when we learn to observe, we are able to gain control and mastery of our world. Thus, when the energy field of E5 is well-balanced in a home, (free of negatives like toilets, garbage, and other imbalances) it provides the residents with strong sense of control over their surroundings, an air of authority, and power. Residents are full of confidence, enjoy high self-esteem and a strong willpower. However, when there are imbalances in this energy field, it is seen that the residents tend be unsure of themselves and their decisions keep on changing generally. Their mindset is flickering.

Mythologically, Surya is the father of Yam as well as the planet Saturn (Shani - the Deity of the West direction). Surya and Shani do not go well together and even in the zones of Vastu, are placed diametrically opposite to each other.

The Vedas state that the Sun is responsible for manifestation of life on earth. For if the rays of the Sun are absent, life would not exist. When seen in the context of Vastu, this energy field has maximum impact on the males of the family. When there are imbalances here, or the area is cut in the floor plan, the men of the such homes are found to be not very responsible. They do not take their family responsibility very seriously and do not fulfill their roles towards the immediate and extended family. Also, there is a very strong urge in them to shy away from day-to-day practical tasks.

This energy field is also responsible for good fame and name in the society. When we are looking for an established name and fame in the society, we need to attend to this energy field.

Even in those cases, where this energy field is extended in the bar-chart, it is seen that the residents are dominant and authoritative in their outlook and want to exert control on others.

In addition to the recommended remedies of MV, those who have an astrologically well placed Sun, can keep Vishnu poster in this energy field.

In the markets there are a lot of Sun faces being sold nowadays. Most of them are made of brass, while some of them are made of copper. Placing a brass sun to a space helps enhance the stability of that space, for brass signifies the earth element; while the placement of the copper sun helps to enhance fire element in the space, for copper signifies the fire element. If you have a choice, it should be made looking at the bar-chart. It will help you bring effective results.

**Entrance Effects: E5**

The Sun represents heat, energy, and light. When this zone of energy is
balanced, the residents enjoy the flow of the Sun energy in its
complete strength. When energy of this zone is disturbed by the placement of a door, the residents remain disturbed and suffer from a short-temperament and aggressive behaviour.

**Summary**:

Every energy field is unique. Surya, the energy field, belongs to the direction of East, of social associations and connections. When balanced, the residents enjoy a strong and a healthy rapport with people and the society, especially if working in public domain or are head of institutions. They are not shy and do not evade public interaction. When there is imbalance in this energy field, the residents develop an escapist mentality, leading to loneliness and in some cases, depression too.

As the Aditya-Hridayam Stotra states, the power of the Sun is very auspicious and highly beneficial, helps to be victorious in every battle and destroys enemies and brings permanent happiness. In the same way, a balanced energy field of Surya, helps the residents to emerge confident and strong willed in life.

आदित्यहृदयम् पुण्यम सर्वशत्रु-विनाशनम ।     
जयावहम् जपेन्नित्य-मक्षय्यम परमम् शिवम् ॥

(These observations are solely based on my case-studies and case-studies of many Acharyas. It may or may not apply to your case observations.)

Acharya Seema Karecha.
