+++
title = "Prajanya: The Energy Field of the East"
draft = false
date = "2017-04-23T11:41:31+05:30"

+++

This is second energy field in the eastern direction.

**Sanskrit meaning**:

- A Dev or Gandharva.

- Rain or thunder cloud.

- One of the 12 Adityas - In the Vedic literature, Adityas are referred to, as the children of Goddess Aditi, while the name Aditya, refers to the Sun. There are 12 Adityas in total, with every month of the hindu calendar being dedicated to each. Each of them is said to be a form of Lord Vishnu.

- Prajanya is associated with the month of Phalguna of the hindu calendar. The climate during this month is cool and pleasant, and it marks the beginning of spring. It is in this month, when the main events of Ramayana and Mahabharata took place.

**Attributes**:

This golden-yellow energy field is associated with flora and fauna. It is responsible for plants and plantations. The rain clouds fall on the earth and encourage the growth of plants. When we meditate in this energy field, we receive insights and our curiosities are satisfied to the core. Prajanya is the energy field that grants fertility to the cow and women.

Although, this energy field falls into the zone of ENE, it is also responsible for imparting of insights. However, the difference between the insights received from Prajanya and insights received from Shikhi, is that Prajanya helps us with the implementation ideas of the insights that one receives from Shikhi. We may have thousands of great ideas in our heads, but if we clueless on how to execute those great ideas, then energy of Prajanya needs attention.

Another important attribute about Prajanya is that it gives the returns in adequate amounts and is also related to abundance.

**Entrance Effects**:

Whenever, there is an entrance placed in this energy field, it leads to more females births in the family.

As per the ancient indian science of Swaryog, there are three important Nadis that run through our human body: Ida, that lies in the left portion of our spine and is associated with Lunar energy, Sushumna, that runs in the center, and Pingala, that runs through the right portion of our spine, and is associated with Solar energy. Ida is associated with the female energy and Pingala is associated with the male energy. As the body of the Vastu-Purush, is over laid with its head facing the ground, the energy zone of Prajanya encompasses that of Pingala Nadi.

Thus, whenever an entrance is placed in Prajanya, the Pingala Nadi (male energy) is disturbed and weakened, resulting into the weakening of the masculine energy force in the house. This leaves the home with increased female energy, and thus raising the chances of more female-births in the house.

However, the females of such households are very bold and daring. They take up the all responsibility in the home and are substitutes to sons in the family. One of my initial cases involved a family which had the entry of Prajanya and the home had 8 lovely daughters. All of them were very responsible, highly educated, very well placed in the society and took good care of their old parents.

### Practical Case Observations

**Toilets** - The placement of the toilets here cause a lot of challenges to the residents in-terms of getting results for their efforts. The resident toils relentlessly without getting his or her due. Only and only when the toilets are treated, the resident get his due in terms of the effort made.

When there is a toilet in this zone - 

- The property does not appreciate in the market. 
- The builder may do a lot of effort but the property prices do not rise. 
- The resident does not get a deserved salary.
- Despite of good work, does not receive the needed appreciation.

**Washing Machine** - The placement of the washing machine, in this energy field, may become the reasons for infertility in women.

When the washing machine is placed here:

- The females suffer from ovarian cyst and challenges related to ovaries and ovarian cysts 
- In some cases, women faces challenges in conception. 
- There are number of cases which are related to gynac issues in the residents. 
- In most of the cases, to acquire desired results, relocation is needed.
- In my [Ashta Laxmi write-up](../20161007-ashta-laxmi/), Santan Laxmi is attributed to NorthEast. In the broader sense, it is this energy field that is related to childbirth - for what greater wealth than children and what more abundance than a loving family.

**Kitchen** - Kitchen here is associated with inadequate returns of one's effort.

With a kitchen in this field, 

- The person remains restless. 
- Develops a depressing and negative attitude for life. 
- Does not receive the adequate returns of his efforts.

This is one of those zones that deal with abundance, and when there is imbalance placed here, the person does not receive returns in abundance.

**Bedroom** - Bedroom here, when balanced, gives a very refreshing night sleep.

In one of my cases, where the resident suffered from Insomnia, and was made to sleep here, enjoyed a beautiful sleep. In her words - "At first, I kept awake like an owl. Now I sleep like a baby."

**Bath** - Baths here, keeps the residents refreshed.

In a case, where the home had a numbers of bathrooms, but the bathroom placed in this energy field was rarely used. Only after the regular usage of the bathroom in this zone was made, the residents enjoyed a sense of refreshment in their lives. Having a bathroom here, but it is not being used, does not bring in much benefit.

**Placement of objects** -

- Objects that signify abundance, like a fruit bowl, or a bouquet of fresh flowers, have given positive results.

- The statue of a mother and a baby cow, or a photo of a mother and her child, have shown improved relationship between a mother and a child in the home.

- The placement of healthy plants here is associated with positive results in terms of finances.

**What is Prajanya?**

Prajanya is that eternal flow of abundance, that flows from the Divine to us and from us to our loved ones, family and the community.Whenever we share something in life, whether in terms of knowledge, thoughts, love or finances, when we share it with an open heart, we get connected with eternal source, and become a channel of the eternal flow. When our mind and hearts are filled with inhibitions and doubts, about sharing, it speaks of our insecurity and fear concerning the reservoir from where we draw our resources from. And in this process of doubt, our reservoir get stale and our offerings no longer remain beautiful or worth sharing. It is the balanced energy of Prajanya that ensures a healthy flow of abundance, from the Divine to us and from us to others further on.

(These observations are solely based on my case-studies and case-studies of many Acharyas. It may or may not apply to your cases observations.)

Acharya Seema Karecha.
