+++
title = "Shikhi: The First Energy Field of the East"
draft = false
date = "2017-04-09T11:41:31+05:30"

+++


The first energy field of the eastern direction is Shikhi.

Sanskrit meaning of Shikhi:

- A 'pointed flame'.
- The minute form of Agni is known as Shikha. A ray of light.
- Shikhi is referred as “Mahadev Shiv” in the ancient text of Samrangan Sutradhar.

**Attributes**: Ideas and Vision.

This sacred red-energy field helps conceive ideas and and also helps condensing those ideas. All creations in this world begin with an idea, and our ability to conceive ideas is related to this energy field.

**Planetary Association**:

The ruling planet of the direction of NE is the Jupiter. Jupiter is the planet of insights. We need to examine this energy field when we find ourselves at loss of ideas. This is the energy zone that provides us deep insights and helps us with clarity of mind.

**Entrance Effects**:

The effects of an entrance placed here is associated with fire, accidents, and losses. When we overlay the body Vastu-Purush on the floor plan of our home, the head of the vastu-purush lies in this zone.

In Samrangan Sutradhar, the meaning of Shikhi is mentioned as Mahadev Shiv. Mahadev Shiv has three eyes. The third eye of Shiv always remains closed. Whenever Mahadev opens his third eye, it causes fire and disaster. Hence, whenever there is an entrance placed in this energy field, the energy field is disturbed and this causes fire related accidents.

And perhaps because of this reason, traditional Vastu recommends the placement of water here. Water here helps to keep the the third eye of Mahadev cool. That is also the reason why application of Chandan is done on the third eye.

Let us also take a look at an example of this zone in context of an entire country. The entire north east region of Thailand is called Isan. It is extended and disproportionate when compared to the rest of the country. Education is given emphasis, while for job opportunities, people have to travel to Bangkok. This region continuous to remain financially backward. The place is well known for its farming practices and water buffaloes.

**A Few Case Observations on Shikhi**:

**1. Kitchen or Red color here causes anger, frustration, and aggression**

The presence of the kitchen here makes the residents very irritable and aggressive. The attitude of the resident becomes very intolerant and thus becomes the cause of lots of fight and tension.

Had come across a case where the couple had filed for a divorce, as the husband suffered from bouts of anger. He suffered from mood swings and remained agitated all the time. When the home was examined, among the other minor imbalances, the major imbalance was the presence of fire in the NE. When the symptom was treated, the man of the house felt better. With time, the divorce was delayed and eventually cancelled.

**2. Store**

The Presence of Store here acts as the Element of Earth, and causes blockage of mind.

When the store is built here, it fill up the space of NE and hence the person loses his capability to think and his clarity of mind takes a beating. The resident complains that he does not know what should be the way ahead in life.

Usually in such cases the client would be utterly confused about life. His words would be - “Mera dimag kaam nahi kar raha,” or “Zindagi ruk gayi hai,” or “Kuch samaj mein nahi atta.” Relocation of Store got positive results here.

**3. Toilets**

Toilets causes challenges in childbirths in the family and several mental defects.

In many apartments, where the floor plan is the same for the several flats that are placed over each other, and all of them have a toilet placed in this energy field, it has been observed that the children that are conceived and are born in the house may suffer from the challenges of the mind. Either they are born mentally challenged or have restricted mental growth.

Treatment here, with the usage of brass, got some minor positive changes. It is best to demolish toilets. If that is not possible, it’s use should to be kept at minimal.

**4. Imbalances**

Imbalances in this energy field causes severe headaches and migraine challenges. In some cases the disease of Dementia (decline of the mental capabilities) and Vertigo (a sensation of feeling off balance), have been observed.

This is a sensitive energy field. Dustbins, Mops, and Brooms placed here may cause depression and other challenges too.

**5. Sleeping here for a very long time causes disinterest in life**

Energies of this field are such that spending a lot of time here, causes disinterest in life. Sleeping is usually an 8 to 10 hour activity. Sleeping here causes more damage to adults than to elders (above 60-70 years) or children (under 12). In a case where the teenage kids slept in this energy field, gave a very tough time to their parents. Relocation of the bed is the only effective solution.

**6. Spending more time here**

When the resident spends 8 to 10 sitting here, it is equivalent to sleeping. In such cases the result shall be same as the bedroom.

In one of the cases, the resident had a study placed here, and he spent a lot of time doing research based work. Over a period of time, it resulted into disinterest in life. Relocation of the person’s study table in SSE gave positive results.

**7. Eye-sight issues**

Having fungus and molds on the wall, water seepage, cracked paint, sewage etc can cause stye (lumps around the eyes), mild or severe eye sight issues. In a case, there has been association with blindness and imbalances of this zone.

Removal of the mess from this area, will provide some relief. However the problems will take a very long time to be solved.

**8. Door**

Doors placed over here, esp in offices will create problems related to electricity board or issues of short-circuits on regular basis. When huge buildings are build with this entrance, few workers die in the construction stage.

The treatment of the Door can be done based on the colors shown in the shakti chakra. It helps in bringing the effective solution to the problem.

**Conclusion**:

Shikhi is a very sensitive energy field.

- It is best to keep this area neat, clean and light.
- Avoid usage of red-pink-orange colors or fire.
- Do not keep dustbins and other junk articles here.
- It may not be possible to reverse the problems that are caused by imbalances in this field. So be cautious.
- This energy field has several implications on your thoughts and psyche. Be mindful while treating or placing objects here.

[45 Powers of Alchemey](http://www.mahavastu.com/…/vastu-…/45-powers-of-alchemy.html)

(These observations are solely based on my case-studies and case-studies of those Acharyas. It may or may not apply to your cases observations.)

Acharya Seema Karecha.
